hi everyone welcome to this inaugural
Q&A from The Washington Post about the
corona virus or koban 19 I'm Libby Casey
anchor at The Washington Post for
politics and accountability and as you
could probably tell I'm broadcasting
from my living room right here in
Washington DC because like all the rest
of you we are trying to limit our
contact in the newsroom and practice
social distancing well over the next
hour we'll answer your questions and I
have some great guests that'll be
joining me to do that and they'll start
coming into the conversation in just a
moment we're gonna tap into the
expertise of our Washington Post
newsroom with a health policy reporter a
congressional reporter who's been on
Capitol Hill watching all of the
legislation attempts unfold and will
also talk with an epidemiologist so if
you have questions for them you can go
into chat on YouTube if you're watching
on YouTube and if you're watching on our
Washington Post website look for that
submission form that's linked and you
can ask questions there and I see we
have Yasmine Abu Talib with us you guys
mean thank you so much for joining us
health policy the reporter we so
appreciate you taking time out of your
busy schedule to talk with us yeah
thanks for having me yeah you know we
also have dr. Giovanni filardo and
epidemiologist getting his shot set up
dr. filardo thank you so much for
joining us epidemiologist and clinical
professor at Baylor University so you're
joining us from Texas correct dr.
filardo yes thank you for having me
yeah thank you for joining us so yes I
mean I wanted you you know the big
headlines are today they continue to
just be shocking and ferb you like dr.
filardo and even for you yes I mean
perhaps are not so shocking because
you've been seeing this unfold and
billed but one of the big headlines from
today is seeing the death toll in Italy
surpass that of China so Italy now has
the most deaths and it's the hardest hit
nation so far what have you been
watching unfold in Italy yes me so I
think in the u.s. there's been a lot of
interest in seeing how the curve has
sort of played out in Italy because a
lot of experts are saying you know we're
about two weeks behind Italy so you know
wondering if the u.s. is gonna see a
sort of similar spike in cases and
deaths just a couple weeks behind Italy
whether the country is eventually going
to have to take the drastic measure
that Italy has to take to try to stem
the outbreak so I think you know from
the US perspective what we're waiting to
see is whether the sort of drastic
social distancing measures that a lot of
people and states have been willing to
take help mitigate the spread so that we
don't ever reach the crisis point of
Italy and the other thing that we're
keeping a close eye on and trying to
report out is whether hospitals have the
protective equipment they need whether
they have the medical equipment they
need like ventilators there's been a lot
of concern over shortages of protective
equipment our colleagues did a story
about that today about how people are
our nurses and doctors and people in the
front line are having to make sort of
makeshift masks out of bandanas and sort
of come up with their own personal
protective equipment because there's
been a shortage and you saw in the press
briefing today there were a lot of
questions that came up about and we've
seen it over the last few days a lot of
questions over whether the US has enough
ventilators you know when hospitals
start seeing a surge in patients and and
we're it's still a bit unclear how the
u.s. is the health care system is going
to be able to handle the crush of
patients that a lot of people are
expecting to see flatten the curve is
something that we've all learned about I
think a lot of us who aren't in the data
field hadn't really you know thought
about this or heard about this a lot
before dr. filardo what is the
importance of flattening the curve and
and what are you looking to for models
of success and then models of failure
frankly well it's critical because the
main issue that the health resources
every year right now so the problem that
like you're mentioning we don't really
have enough spirit or ventilator ICU
units therefore the idea is to try to
mitigate the curve in a way that we are
actually impacting the operator the
healthcare systems in a in a in a slower
way in other words the idea is to try to
avoid what actually unfortunately is
happening right now in Italy where they
are getting overwhelmed I am a huge
supporter of as an epidemiologist the
way I see an epidemic is really based on
a mathematic
to me the what you think pathos one
person over the rest of the community so
each of us if you have poverty on the on
the virus unfortunately being able to
infect at least three people anywhere
between two enough I pray enough people
the the issue is how we try to remove
that number to actually purely be lower
if you're able to bring the number
around one we are very close to can to
stop the epidemic so that's why the
social responsibility in Timon actually
keeping the distant romantic people's of
the social distance very critical so the
idea is really really it's you know we
we start eliminate in testing but now
the responsibilities are is on the
citizen so we are responsible if we had
the opportunity to really slow down the
infection rate and therefore ultimately
be successful so forget about what
happened in the past think about the
future try to really be itself its own
ass you know once we have read the
people so getting together so we can
really really really do it but we need
to be very very smart so if you wanna
see drama and I have my children let's
don't do that if the children might they
might be carriers their attic grandma a
photo is very vulnerable so I wanna have
a drink with my friend forget about for
the next four five weeks
I wanna people over don't do that I'm
Italian I cook I like to have people
over for dinner so I don't do that so
it's really now it's the game he shift
from the possibility from you know
destitution now it's the personal
responsibility if we we need to really
make sure that every single citizen
every single person living in the
country need to understand that it was
as if he can do it together yeah
for both of you stirring the Washington
Post today looks at Singapore Hong Kong
different places and points out that
Hong Kong some places we're faster to
respond in part because they dealt with
virus issues before um but that there so
there's also state control that's been
in play but also personal responsibility
and the article talked about
specifically in Hong Kong people taking
personal responsibility and taking the
direction seriously so let's go over he
asked me what the federal government has
said about what people should be doing
and then we'll talk with dr. filardo
about what he thinks we should all be
doing so you've seen in the press
briefings over the last few days you
know the President and other officials
have said don't have gatherings of more
than 10 people you know to really limit
social gatherings there were some
pictures over the weekend of you know
large crowds of people at beaches are
lined up at bars you know there's been a
lot of sort of urging of young people
especially to please stay home to please
practice social distancing because even
though they may be at lower risk of the
sort of symptoms and the effects of the
virus they can still be carriers to more
vulnerable populations so and you saw it
in the press briefing today dr. Burks
the White House response coordinators
you know sort of pleaded with young
people and applauded the measures that
people have taken but also said you know
please stay home please take this
seriously even if you're not at high
risk or you're not particularly worried
about yourself you could still affect
more vulnerable population so they
really sort of strengthened their
message over the last couple weeks
telling people to take these measures
trying to explain how serious this is
and just how important it is that people
you know not gather in large groups for
a while you saw even the president
changed his tone very much earlier in
the week where he said you know this
could last till July or August so sort
of you know giving Americans a sense of
how bad it could get and and why the
social distancing practices we're all
doing now are so important and dr.
filardo would you add anything to that I
mean even gatherings of ten people
seemed like something that could easily
you know spiral because if the three of
us get together that's fine but then if
yes mean goes and hangs out with nine of
her friends and I go hang out with nine
of my people then essentially yes mean
is in contact with most people that I
hang out and so on and so forth so what
is your guidance the air currents are
the the number of people that we think
is okay to hang out with or to spend
time with with based on their
function that we know what the infection
rate is in the country
so if infection rate let's say is you
know 20,000 people 30 let me say number
of people which is more easy for our
follow for the public if you have 20,000
people I have certain probability to
have one person with the condition with
a B+ applicator in or 10 people so with
10 people probably assuming there are
only 5,000 people infected probably more
likely that person is you don't have
anybody infected the problem behavior
that we do not know how many people are
affected so the reality is in a very
conservative terms if you really want to
beat the virus my suggestion is really
to avoid completely to actually get on
with your friend or family I was invited
to a birthday party you know next week
I'm not going my wife is not going I
talk to my friends I do not have the
part each other the party so right now
the reality that we do not have the
numbers therefore the number of 10 it's
not necessarily another that is really
real a lot of yellow gonna be alive
because we don't really know how many
people in being infected we have a
question that came in from Jim in
California how many people in the US
have been tested perc Ovid 19 yes mean
can you shed some light on to where the
testing process is that right now
because we do hear what a message from
the briefing so the president is
conducting and vice president pens and
his team and then we're hearing
something different from other federal
health authorities and people at the
state level and local level so I
actually I don't know the exact number
of people that have been tested it's
actually kind of a difficult number to
get ahold of right now you know there
isn't a central repository quite yet of
the number of cases and the number of
people who have been tested we do know
that the testing capacity has ramped up
you know as the administration has
allowed academic labs and hospital labs
and other companies to get involved they
approved new diagnostic tests from these
manufacturers so the testing capacity
has increased
dr. filardo please correct me if there
is an exact number that I don't know of
but I actually I'm they sort of the
administration has said how many test
kits are
available but that is not the same as
the number of people who have been
tested correct actually what they do a
in the past few know how many bit
analogies unfortunately that's what they
do for living I tracked this kind of
stuff so if you go to the CDC web page
and there is a a page where they tell
you how many people have been test
according to that month of your people
not test so as of now I was just
checking while you were talking
they reported Twitter thirty-three
thousand three hundred forty people have
been tested I can't even tell you how
many of these people that were actually
positive about any couple of second yes
they probably had that now fortunately
actually with a you know the regular lab
so what are the industrial at the lab if
you use when because which get come
abroad works done this testable probably
will go up hopefully so twenty three
thousand seemed very well but I do know
is the fact that for example the u.s.
asked that health from Italy the
military military they sent actual
testing information because I need to
double-check I think I'm talking about
around hundreds of thousand tests to be
sent over to the US why there was a
delay I don't know I think that's a no
that the Chinese government they saw
that they were able to get the general
sequencing of the virus they immediately
inform the whu-oh so if you are in
charge of taking care of your people and
your country the first thing you do is
go to WH o and you know public officials
again the general frequency in terms of
what you can test you know you can break
put together your own test which usually
has some issues because the CDC has a
very low volume of you know tests of
evil to start with and ideas mean I just
wanted to add one thing you know doctor
Florida mentioned the the CDC is saying
about 33,000 tests have conducted one of
the big concerns you know a common point
of comparison is South Korea which was
testing about 10,000 people a day and
that was a big part of how they were
able to get a handle on the outbreak so
33,000 whether maybe it's a little bit
of an undercount
because you know they have to wait for
data that come in from the states about
how many tests they've conducted but
either way that's a pretty low number
especially given how far the u.s. is
into its outbreak yeah if I can
interject actually again I like numbers
so out of you know the u.s. basically
compared to other country really last a
Monday the last in 10 performing tests
over 1 million people and 1,000 people
keep in mind that right now I believe in
South Korea they test over 220,000
people but the population is way smaller
than the US us we're trying to 50
million people so if you do the math you
see how many people you have actually
tested by 10,000 people which is very
low if the problem is true for one in
the surveillance piece this value is
very particular it's very different than
what we saw in the past people that get
sick but there are systemic so if you
are don't test I don't know I do not
know if I do at the test
I'd love the virus and I walk around
like I do nothing so without me that
surveillant piece what we're doing now
we're trying to test only the people
that are cinematic we don't really have
the full picture so it's very difficult
to really implement measure to try to
actually block their process the only
one is that reco nyan process which is
unfortunately made to stay home I mean
he same home you know people have talked
about how really it's relatively easy in
terms of what what is being asked of you
and yet it's so contrary to what we're
all used to and I'm seeing so many
people do this like oh but I'm staying
home except for oh but I'm staying home
except for this or except for that we
will actually talk later on in this hour
about some strategies for trying to
adhere to all of this and you'd stay
home but I want to ask you guys some
more of the medical questions and the
the the policy questions that are coming
in one question comes from North
Carolina rosna writes in and asks how
many have recovered from corona virus
and how did they recover so dr. filardo
can you give us a sense of what does it
mean to recover now we know there's a
severity of symptoms so what does it
mean to recover for someone
when I say that Salamis people get
infected at equal rate at any age so if
you're five years old you're the same
probability to get positive then a 90
years old the difference is how we react
that's it I want to make sure that
people understand that it's not if
anybody gets infected at the same rate
you know everybody doesn't get infected
the same way so let me interrupt you
there so that's important for two
reasons one children can be carriers can
be carriers even if they're not reacting
as severely to the symptoms which is
very important but also it as you know
reveals a lot about about the numbers
and about who might be more vulnerable
and who might not be so please continue
yes so basically they show you is how do
we implement measures to limit the
probability that the seeker the people
that have you know immuno depression
people that have died people that is
smokers people that are also ever
actually with the capital node here they
also man men are more likely to have
actually issued and woman in thermo be
healed so yeah you have a situation
where country like Italy where we have
if there is second country in the world
for elderly they the way this Italy was
impacted compared to South Korea eighty
percent of the people in South Korea
that they were testing positive they
were younger than 60 years old in Italy
the other way around
that's because they need a lot of
testing so when we went to see what
happen Italy why the mortality so high
is because the mortality in Italy so
high because there are a lot of people
with a lot of issues and the population
is very old the combination of these two
things just completely split all the
numbers everywhere what we lack veneer I
don't know they come the way that the
pattern of the population in the US
it'll be different but we don't know
what the real infection rate is so we
don't really know it on the video answer
so this question of how do they recover
can you take us through if someone does
have
your case of chrono virus of copn 19
how does their body recover so they they
way the way works and for that let me
tell you actually how you get sick how
what happened to you
so the people that watch this condition
they they will unfortunately start to
develop their body start to react they
are immuno depress the the body start to
react with some inflammation rate which
we've got very very high so the brain
the heart all the organs have to really
over react to the device getting in at a
ten point organ one by one the shutting
down the plumbing the main probably we
have done there clearly the lungs
because of people cannot breathe how
they they get better at they right now
they're doing a mix of the very rare
today actually or not or not oh no one
of the scientific journal that's that
they're using actually stem cells so
they get their own cells has tried to
elaborate it put it back into the body
the body's try to react how do we know
if the person is actually safe or not at
what we do we do one test and then after
two days after 24 hour we do another
test if the truth that's a negative the
assumption that the person says okay
the tests were in an interesting way and
usually what you do you measure
antibodies in this case you don't
measure the antibodies the test is
actually looking for the genome sequence
the genetic sequence your off the virus
into a swamp and it can be done on the
nose and we can throw to be spewed on so
how do we know that the person you know
is okay it's because we do two tests
it could be that you still have some
viral load in your body because you're
fighting the violence but that's usually
it's not concerned because the person
cannot infect other people in the
situation now women want to say that in
the literature what they saw I saw that
in China they published in the early
result and they look like the some
people there in fact him up to 37 days
since the contracted the virus so 37
days did you say yes yes so it was
published in JAMA
so basically if I get sick today for the
next 37 days assuming if they recover so
Ricola means that they do two tests and
I'm okay up to 37 days and
in fact no it doesn't mean if everybody
there are some exception that's the the
ranges from one day to 37 most of the
people they get not effective anymore
around a 24 attacks from the literature
again the data they can very very
quickly from China I'm a scientist today
there is a process to go to publish in
the area papers yeah everything was done
on steroids everything was done very
fast it quick so there was no able we
were not able to chat but we need to
trust in our journals like JAMA and real
internal medicines are very important
signs I'm going to be the homework
carries writing in from Evanston
Illinois and asking what is the end of
this look like and what are the metrics
that will tell us when it's safe to go
back to work or to school to parks and
she's asking like do we all essentially
have to get it and build immunity or a
large percentage of us and before we
have you the answer that dr. filardo yes
mean let me ask you what is the federal
government working towards like as they
think of a question like Kara's asking
what are they trying to move us towards
well obviously the federal government
wants an end to it you know the
economy's sort of tanked the last couple
of weeks we've had reports of layoffs
beginning because businesses like
restaurants and stores that have hourly
workers but too close so there been
layoffs there been layoffs in the
airline industry you know the economy
has taken a really hard hit with the
world essentially shutting down for
several weeks or a couple months at a
time
so the administration's been urging
people you know like we said earlier to
practice social distancing to try to
mitigate the spread I think you would
said earlier you know flatten the curve
try to make sure that there isn't a
crush of cases in the health care system
so that doctors and nurses don't have to
make these really tough decisions you
know sort of triaging patients and
deciding who has the best chance of
surviving or you know recovering sort of
some of the difficult choices they've
had to make in Italy that we've heard
about so I think they're they're urging
these sort of social distancing
practices they're looking at models that
help explain how bad it could get what
it could look like and also looking at
models at how much you can slow the
spread or reduce the number of cases if
you take certain measures use I mean
you've been reporting on the White House
reaction what was it that changed
president Trump's
comments on this what was the tipping
point for him to go from downplaying the
severity of coronavirus to talking about
his concerns we actually don't know
exactly what changed his tune back on
Monday we've been wondering if it was
maybe the Imperial College report that
showed just how bad this could get that
millions of people could end up dying we
know that from our reporting over the
weekend that the president was shown a
model showing that this could last a
couple of months and then you know we
saw on Monday he said this could go on
till July or August so we're not sure if
he if it was maybe the Imperial College
report if he was shown some other model
if it was a certain advisor sort of you
know making the case to him in a way
that finally resonated with him but we
have seen a pretty distinct change in
his tone there's still a lot of self
praise and in these in these press
conferences there's still a lot of
praise over travel restrictions and that
sort of thing but you have seen you know
sort of a stop to Trump and other
administration officials trying to
downplay the threat which you know every
public health expert we've spoken to and
medical expert we've spoken to us that
is really important because you know
people look to those press conferences
and to what top administration officials
for messaging and to understand what
they should be preparing for and what
they should be doing so I think you can
you can probably see that reflected and
you know how people are behaving now dr.
filardo back to our question from Kara
what is the end of this look like well
I'm afraid that it will take a real time
I think it's unfortunately approximately
20% of the population will be getting
infected so we're talking about you know
296 million people in the country
they're talking about that presently 70
million people are getting affected and
the end look like if we do like we just
suggested now able to be smart income of
you know social distance you know and
the you know a personal responsibility
and social responsibility
I think that's an amenity and 20 percent
over time we will be able of your time
to achieve our own vaccine and awfully
we will be getting will we be able to
protect the vulnerable so we can make it
without getting in
- internets here so more likely that's a
completely my estimation they subjective
based on my own models which again are
one big data that I'm not completely
checked because I get data from
different sources
I'm expecting a you know - did not go
very high because now you be testing so
I'm gonna be testing with some people
that people not supposed to be testing
you know you know - two weeks ago and
then will happen that literally you'll
see important what are you going up most
living resources will be available if
the administration decided to like you
were suggesting to implement major
immediately to restrain you know our
look different we need tonight the u.s.
is very simple if I tell a bit now and
stay home they live in apartments there
are four or five people live in a
two-bedroom apartment they don't have a
yard yeah this country be lucky because
I be a lot just not a lot of room so if
they ask you to stay home you stay home
but if you want to take a walk it's
totally fine because the longer they
don't actually interact with other with
other people so really what is this
doing it's very little if just to
protect the people it's unfortunately a
worse outcome if they get infected so my
prediction is nobody will go up the
infection will be on 20% at the end of
this process and then awfully before we
get to that 20% we would be able to you
know develop a vaccine probably early
next year so that they're the people
that are more vulnerable able to receive
it so probably for the next year we
would be still I mean these let's talk
about some practical advice for people
who do live in close quarters I'm not
talking about people who live among
family members because we can maintain
that unit but people who do live in
apartment buildings or some sort of
shared housing where they're passing by
people in common spaces on a regular
basis what should we be doing and not be
doing if that's how you live so the the
main transmission of the virus come from
droplets coming you know when I when I
speak I want accent so when xpk I just
I'm very messy so so if I'm given in
fact the best person to be around
stay away from me it keeps saying that
these things going for me maybe nine
because whatever the particle property
right but he can also stay in the air
there were some analysis done a study
done to ascend there so it's long as
you're far away you know a meter from
someone or one yard and you have any
careful if you see the person sneezing
or coughing just try to stay away you
still mind
but more importantly what what really we
haven't done too well in the past even
everything flew ends a bit of flu it's
whenever you go home or whenever
just wash your hand don't touch your
eyes don't touch your nose don't touch
your mouse which is thing that we do
every day think about you from a subway
in New York right you talk to you yeah
and you know on the railing because
there you know you're running and then
maybe you touch your face but that's no
matter we need to be careful now we
cannot do that so when it blows I mean
even regular clothes from now it's fine
but cluding well now we enter you know
they did summertime springtime just
where blows try to be careful don't
touch your mouth and touch your eyes
it's a very busy major and wash you know
searches around the house if you you
know when I was in what you might be
here with Lee maybe you know for other
people coming from all over the world so
be very careful about how we are
cleaning up the house do it you know use
Clorox there's fine you know they get
funny that's fine there are very simple
major that all what they call
epidemiology 101 against epidemics is
wash your hand we actually share with
other people keep the distance and
awfully soon we will be able to test all
of us you know it would be nice to know
if you're not first American nothing
whenever you're talking about Hong Kong
seeing the fourth I wanna a lot of
attention because they're they're public
health official they were very quick
about are today
very quickly in in Hong Kong we're still
doing it there is a question at every
single person needs to fill out every
day based on your temperature do you
have any symptom and every week you need
to report if you get to a point that you
can score activity you've definitely
you're at risk immediately call the
doctor you could to get tests
if you do that it's not very difficult
very simple stuff we can actually really
identify the people you've got higher
risk okay yeah we just mean I mean so
who is taking the responsibility there
let's talk about the local
responsibility and response of
governments statewide response versus
federal response you know we have her
Governor Cuomo of New York strength
praise President Trump and vice versa
trying to have like more of a collegial
relationship and work together but where
are we seeing leadership come from and
and and what is the White House saying
states and localities should do well
states are on the front lines of this so
closing schools you know closing
restaurants and bars limiting social
gatherings those are state decisions the
federal government can't you know
dictate to them what to do they can
issue guidelines but it's ultimately up
to states and cities to decide what
measures they want to take and how
drafts but obviously the federal
guidance makes a big difference and what
they decide to do you did see states
like New York California Washington sort
of out ahead of the federal government
you know when they were having these
large outbreaks beginning and and
starting to see community spread that
they moved more quickly than the federal
government to you know start urging
people to limit social gatherings you've
seen the Bay Area take some pretty
drastic measures since they're having a
lot of cases there so the the federal
government can issue guidelines you know
really drastic action would be issuing a
sort of quarantine for people and
limiting how much you go out like we've
seen in other countries I don't think
those are extremely serious discussions
right now so so what we're seeing right
now you know school closures and things
like that those are state and local
decisions here's the question that gets
back to the practical heart of this
asking about viruses on surfaces just
how long does a virus live on a surface
that comes from Oklahoma dr. filardo can
you give us a sense of that what do we
know now the new paper just published a
couple of days ago really depends on the
surface you look like that's a metal
like aluminum or glass the virus
actually likes it that particular
material they can be surviving for a few
days they divided nothing like cardboard
for some reason probably because it's
very porous so somehow doesn't work in
the in the it what they found again it
we were not really aware of look at its
the the virus can actually float in
there for a little bit which initially
we didn't believe that but now there are
some tests showing that now one thing
that we want to keep in mind even if the
virus is in let's say on a glass or
somewhere they can stay there you know
up to you know four or five days
whatever I think that pretty much the
timing and the viral load decrease over
time which means that if I'm going to be
in touch of in contact with particular
virus that have been there plus a
foreplay thanks I have certain
probability to get infected if I'm going
to be touching the virus touching my
mouth or my nose citrusy there after six
days they probably didn't wait very long
so if that's why again you go back again
to this basic stuff social
responsibility fire symptoms selected no
further but I have allergy right now I
don't know if my coffees are the Jewish
device right so what they do every time
I touch something you know I just throw
it away if I touch my glasses backing up
you know so it's very very important
that we do what you know we need to do
to I see the assumption is that always
assume the worst case scenario so be
careful what make sure that these try
not to infect anybody else so virus
unfortunately it can survive in three
days or surfaces another surface and I
can what is not the problem and we go to
the grocery store mostly stuff is just
like it you know it's safe 99.99% are no
concern about doing that so yes that's
pretty much what we know right now you
know when you mentioned flattening the
curve and trying when we talk about
sliding the curve in you dr. Larry you
were talking about why that's
significant you know one thing that
we've heard about from health experts as
well as some state officials and federal
officials as well yes I mean is that a
big purpose to flatten the curve is to
space out how many people would be at a
hospital
one time because resources are so tight
which is of course a very disturbing
proposition so I wanted to go over this
question from Elaine who wrote to us and
asked what is being done to acquire more
ventilators for US hospitals and while
we answer that I want to I want to
welcome Mike to bonus to the
conversation if you saw a new face come
in is there congressional reporter
joining us live from Capitol Hill Mike
thanks for being with us we'll get to
you in just a moment but I want to go
over this question about ventilators and
what's being done to get more first of
all why is there such a concern over
supply and not just ventilators but all
hospital equipment yes I mean can you
talk to us briefly before you go to dr.
filardo about what the federal
government has to say about the scarcity
of these things so you know they have
acknowledged that there are shortages of
critical supplies like masks like the
nasal swabs that you need to conduct the
diagnostic tests you know the the
question of ventilators has been a
little bit harder to get a straight
answer but president Trump yesterday
said he was invoking the defense
production act he didn't really specify
how he was going to use it or what it
was going to mean but what we do know is
it allows the federal government to sort
of ramp up production of things like
medical devices or other sort of
industrial equipment that might be
needed it's still unclear how it's going
to work he said it's we're not going to
use it unless it's an emergency and we
really need it and hopefully we won't
ever get there
so it's it's a bit unclear what exactly
is being done to address the issue of
ventilators a lot of our stories have
just focused on concerns and hospitals
and health care centers about masks and
equipment and things like that but maybe
dr. Florida knows more than I do about
you know what exactly can be done
surgical are down what do you jump in
well yeah the issue that's a bit not to
society tonight no way prepared for this
kind of actually very very physical
sounds like at the hospitals they have
only a limited number of IC use and
therefore ventilators and when there is
a situation where you are requesting
basically 30 or 40 percent more than
what every the people right now kill
every day you know they're off because
they cannot handle so Eric you for one
second Mike to bonus if you can hear me
we're going on a wild adventure with you
around the Capitol area it's okay you
are on though so even though you're not
talking yet we do so sir that's okay
you've given us a tour of the Capitol
and I have many questions for you about
just where you were on what you're doing
but I but this but I want to get back to
the heartedness because this is such an
anxiety point for so many people
especially you have an elderly relative
or someone who might have a long issue
the prospect of not having a ventilator
when it's needed is so scary so dr.
filardo can can you come pick up check
on that yeah go back to what that got in
Singapore in Taiwan and they were
prepared so they did something that is
called you know health resources
assessment before as soon as a China
government it told them into the world
that to be under probably the virus we
need'd let's check what we have I'm
gonna be the knowledge if you're seen
they do a check I get the information so
they assess what they had in place here
we really really can't because you know
the system is very discombobulated
because there are a lot of hospital
saving there are lots of it's very
complicated here for they going to
understand how many hospital beds be
having to affect CEO succession American
Hospital Association is actually provide
a lot of guidance say knowing whether I
see you are and knowing how for example
in Italy what they're doing now they're
moving patients that are in ICU from
certain region to other region because
they they're more of a ability in other
regions so here first thing to do is to
assess the mini ICU we have how many
ventilator we have try to estimate how
many people possibly be able to get it
in place like New York whether you're
probably lot of cases they probably
they're sure they'll see you will be
very very very high I really appreciate
what what Dominick weren't going to go
to format he'd to think ahead it's all
about now we are here what we do to fix
it so yes we don't have enough beds okay
let's just be present to episode and I
it probably going back to what you were
saying that's probably we need a
quarterback be someone who tells it all
the play what if you're calling Billie
Jean and here
that are on the process of getting that
and all the pieces are almost there but
they're not
Maleficent you know one question that
did come in on this point I just want to
get to you real quick this question in
hospitals and supplies people have been
we've been seeing reports in the
Washington Post in other places about
hospital staff trying to use you know
goggles and makeshift things and
bandanas to protect themselves so how
protective is that sort of material and
dr. filardo obviously me walking down
the street is different than any are
nurse and what what he would be coping
with I would be more than Sinatra me
about the exposure to people because
they might be infected and it'd be at
that point carrier and they're you know
as you know that one of the main reason
why you bury the mask is to protect
other people against you and everything
but that doesn't doesn't doesn't work so
II it is morning a gemologist friend of
mine from Florida to me that's one of
his patient tested positive immediately
some quality itself so what I'm saying
yeah it like it's again go back to the
social responsibility there's a
responsibility what we do so if I'm a
you know affirmation or someone working
on environment and I'm in daily contact
with patients and I don't dare dropping
gears to do my work I raise my hand and
say it's not doing I mean I mean I need
to have what any other way I could be
the and your father people let's bring
back to bonus in at the conversation so
Mike first of all tell us where you are
in the capital right now I am on the
Senate side about 20 or 30 yards away
from the floor in a quiet hallway a much
quieter hallway than usual what are
people doing there we've seen a reports
now a couple of House members testing
positive for coronavirus what are you
doing to protect yourself what is
congressional leadership doing to
protect its members so number one the
house is not in the Capitol this week
the House members left after votes early
on Saturday morning to pass the relief
bill that the President signed into law
yesterday
the Senate is here they are working they
are have taken some precautions they are
doing some sort of sort of social
distancing they've been meeting in
larger rooms to sort of separate
themselves from one another but they're
continuing to meet the staffers are
working much as they have been
previously I think some serve in-person
meetings are absolutely being replaced
by phone calls and other you know
telephonic sorts of media so but you
know people were still here they're
still working I mean and reporters are
still on top of each other expiry honest
we're being a little more it's certainly
more mindful of everybody's personal
space including the personal space of
the lawmakers but we're still here in
person we're still in proximity to one
another so it's not an ideal situation
by any means that writes in and asks um
YouTube can Congress work from home
somehow and then what will happen if the
virus does indeed spread through the US
government might well I mean that's
we're certainly have that conversation
now because we had two members say that
they were positive for kovat 19
yesterday two House members there now
self Orrin sitting at their homes one in
one here in DC a Florida member and one
who's in Utah now but there's also a
sort of cascading number of lawmakers
who were in proximity of these people
last week were now self quarantine even
though they're symptomatic but so it's
something that everyone is now thinking
about you know there's discussions about
remote voting today the chairman of the
House Rules Committee said he was
looking at proposals to do remote voting
it's unclear whether that's gonna go
anywhere but it's always a discussion
watched post reported this afternoon
that the head of the Senate Intelligence
Committee Richard Burr was at this
private lunch three weeks ago and he
warned to people that he was at that for
any virus could be a huge deal now this
was a recording that NPR got ahold of he
compared it to the 1918 flu epidemic
and said things privately that he was
not saying publicly Mike take us through
that story and and what the present
fallout is from that I mean you pretty
much said it all there Libby I mean the
basic story is that he was saying
something privately that leaders of his
party were not saying publicly a
particular particularly president Trump
I don't think anyone asked Richard burr
about it in that time frame publicly any
member of the press I don't think we can
point to something where he personally
said something differently but it did go
against the message that the president
was sending at the time which was this
too shall pass he was certainly not
putting out alarm bells of the kind that
Richard Burr was telling his fellow
North Carolinians in this private of
that news mean can you have been remind
us what the president and White House
staff was saying three weeks ago it was
it was various you know levels of you
know minimizing the situation you know
the president saying well even if it
comes it'll be you know when it gets
warm out it'll go away like it could be
big but it could might not you know it
seemed like at the time he was more
mindful of preventing and what he
perceived as an overreaction in the
markets yeah let's have us mean jump in
on this yes I mean three weeks feels
like a hundred years ago in terms of how
we've all curbed our activities and how
much our life hasn't changed especially
if you've lost your job or loss of
income or you the family member who's
sick but take us back more to what the
White House was doing just a couple of
weeks ago yeah I was trying to remember
what was three weeks ago but I think
that was right around when the president
vice president vice president pence in
charge of the response and that was
actually because Nancy messantia top
official at the CDC had done this call
at the end of February where she said
she saw her family down and warned of
significant changes to daily life and
they had to be prepared for that and I
thought case the US had around a dozen
or fifteen confirmed cases but those
were just confirmed cases there was
pretty limited testing
going on at that time and now you know
the thought is a lot of the cases
weren't being caught because the
criteria was so narrow so you know they
act the white house actually grew
extremely frustrated with the with Nancy
Meza news comments and thought it was a
huge overreaction and you know why would
she cause that type of fear and you know
we sort of see that that's exactly
what's playing out now you know now
people say she was right she was just a
couple days too early but that's still
you know even in that press conference
where that where the president put
announced that pence would be running
the response he reiterated over and over
you know we only have 15 cases and I
think it could be down to zero pretty
soon even though that ended up being the
same day that we learned in the first
community transmission case so just
three weeks ago you know the president
was saying you know soon we'll be down
to just a couple cases or zero cases and
it all sort of miraculously disappear so
obviously we've come a long way since
then like what has Congress done so far
what are they considering doing next so
as I mentioned the President signed into
law a sort of interim rescue package
that was aimed at providing some sick
leave some family leave for people been
affected by this either directly or
indirectly because they need to get
tested or they have loved ones that need
to get tested that bill also looked at a
number of other things free testing you
know a few other things here and there
but the big you know the big deal is so
ahead of us which is a economic rescue
bill that by all accounts is going to be
a trillion dollars plus two you know
inject some cash into two individuals
and the businesses that are basically
hanging by a string right now that the
economy has basically been shut shut to
a granule halt so today we expect Senate
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to come
forth with the proposal that the
thinking is that that starts a
negotiation with Senate Democrats with
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and her
chamber this could stretch out for the
next certainly three days at a minimum
maybe you know
next week we could still be talking
about this but there is obviously a lot
of urgency just because of the scope of
the situation that the country and the
world is facing but also because you've
got senators here who aren't going to
leave until this is done
trust me they want to leave and sort of
followed the best practices that
everyone is being told as soon as
possible and that goes for I will say
for reporters and staff too who you know
we're showing up here every day well I I
know you guys are sitting at home and
it's it's not an ideal situation as I
said before there's also been some
criticism of the White House team that
comes down does the briefing a
coronavirus task force because they come
out and stand really close to each other
and they share a microphone and there's
a lot of like touching and sharing of
germs that we've all been told not to do
you know I will point out that Terry on
who's on YouTube said you know there's
no reason why Congress can't do zoom
session sort of like what we're doing
right now so a big question about is
Congress gonna sort of have to come into
a new a new mode and a new way of
communication um I have another serious
question I want to I want to throw in
here that's coming in about medical
issues um dr. filardo we we know that
the elderly are twist risk we know that
people who who have pre-existing
conditions are at risk I want you to
review first though doctor like what
what pre-existing conditions might be
especially vulnerable and then also we
are seeing data that the very you know
at risk so we're talking infants and
children under five can you take us
through those groups please yes the
people that have underlined tradition
like heart disease or lung disease also
people they have hypertension people
they have their eighties sorry the
hypertension is is quite widespread in
America so that's important to point yes
the if you if all these conditions are
one above each other and kill early age
is a kind of a proxy for this condition
for the you are more likely you might
that's where the heart disease molecule
hard to F COPD more likely to have to a
you know
diabetes so all this conditionally like
I said previously they really put the
question about if you actually get
infected the body start to respond to
the infection
unfortunately the responses with high
inflammation within the organism and in
each organ start to overreact to the
violence so that's not the main
condition but they what he looked like
for the data they'd be available now the
key age because the immune system at
that point for that for the elderly
given all the information that just
provide to you really put them up very
very expressive probably we don't know
how bad it is but we know one trip what
we see and what ravages mortality you
know I see you as a passenger for
children isn't it be strange because the
thank God it just really that their
mortality or their risk of becoming
seriously ill is very low they were the
training study published last week show
me that basically that very little
percentage of children that are really
high risk of getting very very heal and
what we believe it that's just a
hypothesis that's because children
especially when they're very very very
very very many yeah between a zero-day
easy you know one year old they get some
immunity from month or the month in this
I mean for the mother and the same time
the building on immunity probably the
true process together the actual result
in better situation for the children
another hypothesis was that especially
for China where there is a very very
high pollution it be missed it baby they
were now being exposed to pollution yet
so they the lungs still kind of working
nicely I got developing so they they are
more able to to respond to respond today
today to the virus came in dangerous
territory cracks that's what we know now
fortunately as I said that data they're
not really confirmed
the publication process now No then
almost under publication process if
people submit the paper really really
want and the back usually doesn't work
in things but usually takes six months
of shopping so so now you know you look
like these good news but like I said
earlier everybody has the same ability
to get this area
the difference is that children they're
less likely to be done decently he'll
all right thank you
hey Mike I want to let you go she's
probably a more reporting to go do any
final thought you want to leave us with
nope interesting times ahead thanks for
bringing all this together
hey go wash your hands okay thank you
thank you Mike two bonus our
congressional reporter I want to bring
into the conversation Marybeth Albright
she's one of our colleagues at the
Washington Post she's our food anchor
and she also has a background in public
policy so Mary Beth thank you so much
for joining us from your home you know
you provided some like comfort
programming for me as I've watched your
videos about practical things like what
we should have on hand during this time
so I just like to bring you into the
conversation here to have you tell us
about like what are some of these foods
and items and staples that we really
should have on hand because we're all
trying to limit our shopping trips and
be as efficient as possible when we do
leave the house when we have something
delivered thank you so much Libby you
know there's this is the most serious
time right I can't think of a more
serious time in public health in the
decades that I've been in public health
and I think bringing that into it is so
important because we want to have
deliciousness we don't have joy in our
lives but we also need to take care of
ourselves and one of the ways that we
can is with small simple projects
because when you're at home my kid is
upstairs during online school you know
the dog still has to be walked but but
you need to take care of yourself at
times like this so what I focus on with
the foods that I recommend is eating for
your mental health I have no idea idea
how many calories are you today but I
know the foods that's scientifically
they're they're studies that I go into
because of my background in public
health that tell what's going to make
you feel better
and bring a little bit of joy in your
life so some of the things I recommend
whole grains beans I've never seen
Americans so excited to eat vegetables
like the vegetables are just gone from
the shelves frozen vegetables fresh
vegetables but that is terrific
frozen fruits or even freeze dried
fruits are fantastic and all of these
things have been shown to reduce or
mitigate anxiety and I think those are
really important we're doing a
quarantine cooking show which we just
shot the third episode today and we're
doing a happy hour I'm just gonna stop
there there it's not it's not an in
person happy hour but I think there are
a lot of things you can do it mean we
have the spring equinox coming up we
have passed over we have Easter there
and these are these are holidays or
dates that celebrate food among people I
mean if you want I don't like the word
control but I like the word power and we
have power to bring our tribes together
even if they're all over the world and I
think that's the kinds of things that we
should be doing right now you know it's
it's that such it's just important to
hear and remember Mary Beth you know you
had raised a great corporate question
with me that I want to throw dr. filardo
we're all being encouraged to support of
local businesses and we all want to do
that take out you know getting food
delivered as a way to do that making
sure you don't actually interface with
another human being but but purchasing
some food what about the potential for
contamination if someone's sick and and
working is like a delivery person or
what other what are the hygienic things
that you recommend that we all do to
make sure that viruses aren't spread in
other ways besides that person-to-person
contact well the issue is there is a
famous restaurant I believe in New York
called carbone's of her body I don't
know and I was a the news
probably yesterday there was a huge line
outside or delivery people so what is
delivery people they're all in varies
you know one attached to each other so
there is no self distance leave not that
one meter so the parameters they might
get infected they infect to each other
they might
to your home they might infect you when
did they give me the food another song
about food and not concern about the way
that's a you know what watching today
they the Box I'm more concerned about
the carriers and also that the health of
these people that support they are there
outside you know dealing with the video
process right we don't want them to be
put at risk trying to make money of
course I'm so I guess that's the
question of messaging Yasmine and how
about how the government is able to get
the message to everyone including people
who still need to be working right now
and thank goodness for them for the rest
of us people who still need to be
interfacing with others and so what are
you going to be watching for Yasmine in
terms of getting the message out not
just giving the guidance from the
federal government but getting that to
people all over the country in all
languages in all communities that's a
really good question um I think they're
you know what the the White House taking
over the response a few weeks ago a big
focus was to was making sure that the
government spoke with one voice that
people didn't contradict each other
that the guidelines and the message that
they were sending to the American people
was consistent that hasn't quite
happened but I think what we'll look to
see for is you know if they start to
sort of be more consistent in the
briefings you know in the press briefing
today there's a bit all over the place
you know you you see that they sort of
Kareem sometimes and sort of beer off
topic and I think that can make people
sort of confused and not know exactly
what to listen for so I think well what
we should look for is to see you know
and not just the press briefings but you
know a lot of these officials like dr.
Fauci from the NIH dr. Burks other
public health officials are going out
there and doing a ton of media
interviews on cable networks and you
know trying to reach as many people as
possible so trying to see if they you
know and and and so far the medical and
health professionals pretty much have
you know speak with one voice across
those platforms you know go out and try
to reach people where they are not
everyone is going to watch the daily
White House briefings people are more
likely to see people pop up on cable
news and and various channels so just
seeing you know how they're using that
time on air to sort of talk about the
administration's response how about it
what they're looking for and what they
want people to be doing I just want to
throw something in like the parents of
kids get a lot of different messages
right so there's the don't gather more
than ten people in one place and then
there's also I received a because of my
public health background I received an
email from the head the executive
director of a major hospital saying
don't put your kids together under any
circumstances no playdates no sleepovers
my son turns 12 next week and I got
nothing you know and so there are those
because we obviously don't want to
expose our children but we also want
them to exercise in a world where today
Little League canceled the season until
at least middle of May so you know 12
year olds need play doctor Florida
what's your what's your impression of
that guidance to not do any playdates
that's what I've been I've been told as
well certainly like no totally simple
again children like we said likely they
are less likely to develop symptoms
they're less likely to you know to go
into their very acute phase of the
infection therefore they might be
carrier we don't know it so if you do a
play date we'd be there with a video
with a friend of a friend is once at one
of them is infected and the baby comes
you know the child come back home it
would affect all you guys and then again
do not go to with your parents you know
make sure that you know they won't place
without be limited you know opportunity
for them to get infected by others you
know we can all go back to normal life
as so many things it's over so we just
need to be patient if we do that all
together be able to be just fine also a
point you made about metal surfaces so
many playgrounds or metal surfaces and
so that's not advisable to bring your
kids to play because it's impossible to
get small children to not interact with
each other if they're around each other
I went for one more question out to the
group Marybeth quino wrote from Olympia
Washington and asked how do I mentally
and physically prepare for a quarantine
what are your thoughts Marybeth I
remember back in
school in the early 2007 state their
public health ethics course and my
professor said look the world is overdue
for a pandemic um he's not doing well so
I you know it's hard to plan for these
things as I said make sure you have
foods that are going to make you feel
good not just in a moment but long term
everybody wants to bat dive into a bag
of potato chips I totally get it
but if you watch I mean if you watch the
video on the 10 foods to keep in your
pantry and you keep cooking in simple
ways to remember simple projects
I think that'll that'll help a lot I
want to thank all of you so much for
being with us
Marybeth let's do it let's do a zoom for
your son to wish him a happy birthday
next week I would love that
he's literally sitting across from me
and when there was a somebody said no
playdates he's like so exasperated you
know yeah there he is
he's exasperated we gotta figure
something out definitely
I want to thank you Mary Beth Albright
yes mean of Ta'ala and we've also got
dr. Giovanni filardo joining us from
Texas and epidemiologist I want to end
on this picture of Mary Beth's dog who
made a very poor something incredibly
valuable so Mike I I have a puppy who
loves to chew up toilet paper and like
toilet paper daily paper safe but it is
what it is stay with the joy as much as
you can all right well thanks so much to
all of you and thank you for watching
our live stream we're gonna continue
taking your questions and Washington
Post answering questions in a variety of
ways we're doing it on you know this
video chat we're doing it in audio form
we're also doing it of course on our
Washington Post website in the written
content so subscribe join us to get your
questions answered and we'll continue
this conversation
I'm Livi Casey and I want to thank all
of you and also thank my family for
staying amazingly quiet for the past and
thanks to all of you yes
and dr. filardo for joining us and
taking time out of your days thank you
so much we'll see you all later thank
you